docs/internal/PLUGIN_ARCHITECTURE_PLAN.md, before:

# Plugin Architecture Plan: Provider vs Controller Patterns

## Problem Analysis

The current plugin system has inconsistent UX because plugins mix two fundamentally different patterns:

### Current State

| Plugin | Pattern Used | UI Owner | Result |
|--------|-------------|----------|--------|
| Live Grep | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Git Grep | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Git Find File | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Find References | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Keybindings broken, custom UI |
| Search Replace | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Keybindings broken, custom UI |
| Diagnostics Panel | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Works but reimplements everything |

### Root Cause

When plugins try to **own the UI** (Controller pattern) via virtual buffers:
- They must reimplement navigation (arrows, Enter, Escape)
- They must reimplement selection highlighting
- They must define custom modes with keybindings
- The `editor.defineMode()` keybindings are fragile/broken
- Each plugin looks and behaves differently

When plugins **provide data** and let the editor render (Provider pattern):
- Navigation is automatic and consistent
- Selection highlighting is automatic
- Keybindings work reliably
- All plugins look and behave the same

---

## Proposed Architecture

### 1. Standardize on Provider Pattern Where Possible

**Principle:** If a feature just shows a list of results that users navigate and select, use the Provider pattern.

#### A. Results Panel Provider (for persistent panels)

For features like Find References, Diagnostics that show results in a split panel:

```typescript
// Plugin provides data, editor handles UI
editor.showResultsPanel({
  title: "References to 'Args'",
  items: [
    { label: "src/main.rs:33:8", description: "struct Args {", location: {...} },
    { label: "src/main.rs:235:12", description: "args: &Args,", location: {...} },
  ],
  onSelect: (item) => {
    // Called when user presses Enter
    editor.openFile(item.location.file, item.location.line, item.location.column);
  },
  onClose: () => {
    // Called when user presses Escape
  }
});
```

**Editor responsibilities:**
- Render the panel with consistent styling
- Handle Up/Down navigation
- Handle Enter (call `onSelect`)
- Handle Escape (call `onClose`)
- Highlight current selection
- Show item count in status

**Plugin responsibilities:**
- Provide the items list
- Handle the `onSelect` callback
- Optionally update items dynamically

#### B. QuickPick Controller (for transient pickers)

For features like Live Grep, Git Find File that need real-time filtering:

```typescript
// This is what startPrompt + setPromptSuggestions already does
// But formalize it as the "QuickPick" pattern
const picker = editor.createQuickPick({
  placeholder: "Search in files...",
  onDidChangeValue: (query) => {
    // User typed something - update results
    const results = performSearch(query);
    picker.items = results;
  },
  onDidAccept: (item) => {
    // User pressed Enter
    editor.openFile(item.file, item.line, item.column);
    picker.dispose();
  },
  onDidHide: () => {
    // User pressed Escape
    picker.dispose();
  }
});
picker.show();
```

**This is essentially what the prompt system already does** - just needs better documentation and consistency.

---

### 2. Simplify Current Plugins

#### Find References → Use Results Panel Provider

Instead of creating a virtual buffer with custom mode, use a standardized panel:

```typescript
// OLD (Controller - broken)
editor.defineMode("references-list", null, [...]);
editor.createVirtualBufferInSplit({...});
// Plugin manually handles everything

// NEW (Provider - works)
editor.showResultsPanel({
  id: "references",
  title: `References to '${symbol}'`,
  items: references.map(ref => ({
    label: `${ref.file}:${ref.line}:${ref.column}`,
    description: ref.lineText,
    data: ref
  })),
  onSelect: (item) => editor.openFile(item.data.file, item.data.line, item.data.column)
});
```

#### Search Replace → Hybrid Approach

Search Replace needs checkboxes (multi-select), which is more complex:

```typescript
editor.showResultsPanel({
  id: "search-replace",
  title: "Search & Replace",
  multiSelect: true,  // Enable checkboxes
  items: results.map(r => ({ ...r, selected: true })),
  actions: [
    { key: "Enter", label: "Replace Selected", action: executeReplace },
    { key: "Space", label: "Toggle", action: toggleCurrent },
  ],
  onSelect: (item) => previewItem(item)
});
```

#### Live Grep / Git Grep / Git Find File → Already Provider Pattern

These already use `startPrompt()` + `setPromptSuggestions()` which IS the Provider pattern. Just need to fix:
1. Preview not updating → Fix `prompt_selection_changed` handler
2. Cursor position on open → Fix the `openFile` call parameters

---

### 3. Implementation Phases

#### Phase 1: Fix Existing Plugins (Short-term)

Without changing the API, fix the immediate issues:

1. **Live Grep**: Fix `prompt_selection_changed` to update preview
2. **Git Grep**: Fix cursor positioning when opening file
3. **Find References**: Change parent mode from `null` to `"normal"` (already done)
4. **Search Replace**: Simplify keybindings, fix mode inheritance

#### Phase 2: Introduce Results Panel API (Medium-term)

Add a new editor API that plugins can use instead of raw virtual buffers:

```typescript
interface ResultsPanelOptions {
  id: string;
  title: string;
  items: ResultItem[];
  multiSelect?: boolean;
  onSelect?: (item: ResultItem) => void;
  onClose?: () => void;
}

editor.showResultsPanel(options: ResultsPanelOptions): ResultsPanel;
editor.hideResultsPanel(id: string): void;
```

This API would:
- Create the virtual buffer internally
- Handle all navigation and selection
- Apply consistent styling
- Call plugin callbacks for actions

#### Phase 3: Migrate Plugins (Long-term)

Migrate existing plugins to use the new API:
- Find References → `showResultsPanel`
- Diagnostics Panel → `showResultsPanel`
- Search Replace → `showResultsPanel` with `multiSelect`

---

### 4. Keybinding Strategy

All result panels should use the same keybindings, handled by the EDITOR:

| Key | Action | Handler |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Up` / `Down` | Navigate items | Editor (automatic) |
| `Enter` | Activate item | Editor calls `onSelect` |
| `Escape` | Close panel | Editor calls `onClose` |
| `Space` | Toggle selection (if multiSelect) | Editor (automatic) |

**No custom modes needed.** The editor's results panel implementation handles everything.

---

### 5. Visual Consistency

The editor-owned results panel ensures:
- Same selection highlighting style
- Same layout (title, items, help footer)
- Same scrolling behavior
- Same status bar integration

---

## Summary

| Pattern | When to Use | API |
|---------|-------------|-----|
| **Provider (QuickPick)** | Transient search with filtering | `startPrompt` + `setPromptSuggestions` |
| **Provider (Results Panel)** | Persistent panel with results list | `showResultsPanel` (new API) |
| **Controller** | Only when plugin needs full UI control | `createVirtualBufferInSplit` (escape hatch) |

The key insight is: **Let the editor own the UI.** Plugins should provide data and handle callbacks, not try to reimplement navigation and selection.

---

## Known Bugs (Discovered During Implementation)

### `openFile` doesn't position cursor when file is already open

**Severity:** High

**Description:** When calling `editor.openFile(path, line, column)` or `editor.openFileInSplit(...)` and the file is already open in the target split, the view scrolls to show the line but the cursor does NOT move to that position.

**Affected Functions:**
- `handle_open_file_at_location` in `src/app/plugin_commands.rs`
- `handle_open_file_in_split` in `src/app/plugin_commands.rs`

**Expected Behavior:** The cursor should move to the specified line/column position.

**Actual Behavior:** The cursor stays at its previous position. The view scrolls (viewport centers on the line) but the cursor doesn't follow.

**Investigation Notes:**
- Both `openFile` and `openFileInSplit` call `jump_to_line_column(line, column)` after `open_file`
- `jump_to_line_column` uses `self.active_state_mut()` to get the buffer state
- The issue may be that when the file is already open, `active_state_mut()` returns stale state

**Workaround:** None currently. This affects both Find References and Diagnostics Panel jump-to functionality.

---

## Immediate Actions (Phase 1)

1. **Fix openFile cursor positioning bug** (blocking issue for panels)
2. Fix Live Grep preview update issue
3. Fix Git Grep cursor positioning
4. Simplify Search Replace keybindings
5. Document the Provider pattern as the recommended approach

Commit message:

docs: update plugin architecture plan with completed tasks
- Mark ResultsPanel abstraction as complete
- Mark Find References migration as complete
- Downgrade openFileInSplit issue to Low severity (workaround exists)
- Document the focusSplit + openFile workaround

docs/internal/PLUGIN_ARCHITECTURE_PLAN.md, after:

# Plugin Architecture Plan: Provider vs Controller Patterns

## Problem Analysis

The current plugin system has inconsistent UX because plugins mix two fundamentally different patterns:

### Current State

| Plugin | Pattern Used | UI Owner | Result |
|--------|-------------|----------|--------|
| Live Grep | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Git Grep | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Git Find File | **Provider** (via prompt) | Editor | Arrow keys work, consistent UX |
| Find References | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Keybindings broken, custom UI |
| Search Replace | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Keybindings broken, custom UI |
| Diagnostics Panel | **Controller** (virtual buffer) | Plugin | Works but reimplements everything |

### Root Cause

When plugins try to **own the UI** (Controller pattern) via virtual buffers:
- They must reimplement navigation (arrows, Enter, Escape)
- They must reimplement selection highlighting
- They must define custom modes with keybindings
- The `editor.defineMode()` keybindings are fragile/broken
- Each plugin looks and behaves differently

When plugins **provide data** and let the editor render (Provider pattern):
- Navigation is automatic and consistent
- Selection highlighting is automatic
- Keybindings work reliably
- All plugins look and behave the same

---

## Proposed Architecture

### 1. Standardize on Provider Pattern Where Possible

**Principle:** If a feature just shows a list of results that users navigate and select, use the Provider pattern.

#### A. Results Panel Provider (for persistent panels)

For features like Find References, Diagnostics that show results in a split panel:

```typescript
// Plugin provides data, editor handles UI
editor.showResultsPanel({
  title: "References to 'Args'",
  items: [
    { label: "src/main.rs:33:8", description: "struct Args {", location: {...} },
    { label: "src/main.rs:235:12", description: "args: &Args,", location: {...} },
  ],
  onSelect: (item) => {
    // Called when user presses Enter
    editor.openFile(item.location.file, item.location.line, item.location.column);
  },
  onClose: () => {
    // Called when user presses Escape
  }
});
```

**Editor responsibilities:**
- Render the panel with consistent styling
- Handle Up/Down navigation
- Handle Enter (call `onSelect`)
- Handle Escape (call `onClose`)
- Highlight current selection
- Show item count in status

**Plugin responsibilities:**
- Provide the items list
- Handle the `onSelect` callback
- Optionally update items dynamically

#### B. QuickPick Controller (for transient pickers)

For features like Live Grep, Git Find File that need real-time filtering:

```typescript
// This is what startPrompt + setPromptSuggestions already does
// But formalize it as the "QuickPick" pattern
const picker = editor.createQuickPick({
  placeholder: "Search in files...",
  onDidChangeValue: (query) => {
    // User typed something - update results
    const results = performSearch(query);
    picker.items = results;
  },
  onDidAccept: (item) => {
    // User pressed Enter
    editor.openFile(item.file, item.line, item.column);
    picker.dispose();
  },
  onDidHide: () => {
    // User pressed Escape
    picker.dispose();
  }
});
picker.show();
```

**This is essentially what the prompt system already does** - just needs better documentation and consistency.

---

### 2. Simplify Current Plugins

#### Find References → Use Results Panel Provider

Instead of creating a virtual buffer with custom mode, use a standardized panel:

```typescript
// OLD (Controller - broken)
editor.defineMode("references-list", null, [...]);
editor.createVirtualBufferInSplit({...});
// Plugin manually handles everything

// NEW (Provider - works)
editor.showResultsPanel({
  id: "references",
  title: `References to '${symbol}'`,
  items: references.map(ref => ({
    label: `${ref.file}:${ref.line}:${ref.column}`,
    description: ref.lineText,
    data: ref
  })),
  onSelect: (item) => editor.openFile(item.data.file, item.data.line, item.data.column)
});
```

#### Search Replace → Hybrid Approach

Search Replace needs checkboxes (multi-select), which is more complex:

```typescript
editor.showResultsPanel({
  id: "search-replace",
  title: "Search & Replace",
  multiSelect: true,  // Enable checkboxes
  items: results.map(r => ({ ...r, selected: true })),
  actions: [
    { key: "Enter", label: "Replace Selected", action: executeReplace },
    { key: "Space", label: "Toggle", action: toggleCurrent },
  ],
  onSelect: (item) => previewItem(item)
});
```

#### Live Grep / Git Grep / Git Find File → Already Provider Pattern

These already use `startPrompt()` + `setPromptSuggestions()` which IS the Provider pattern. Just need to fix:
1. Preview not updating → Fix `prompt_selection_changed` handler
2. Cursor position on open → Fix the `openFile` call parameters

---

### 3. Implementation Phases

#### Phase 1: Fix Existing Plugins (Short-term)

Without changing the API, fix the immediate issues:

1. **Live Grep**: Fix `prompt_selection_changed` to update preview
2. **Git Grep**: Fix cursor positioning when opening file
3. **Find References**: Change parent mode from `null` to `"normal"` (already done)
4. **Search Replace**: Simplify keybindings, fix mode inheritance

#### Phase 2: Introduce Results Panel API (Medium-term)

Add a new editor API that plugins can use instead of raw virtual buffers:

```typescript
interface ResultsPanelOptions {
  id: string;
  title: string;
  items: ResultItem[];
  multiSelect?: boolean;
  onSelect?: (item: ResultItem) => void;
  onClose?: () => void;
}

editor.showResultsPanel(options: ResultsPanelOptions): ResultsPanel;
editor.hideResultsPanel(id: string): void;
```

This API would:
- Create the virtual buffer internally
- Handle all navigation and selection
- Apply consistent styling
- Call plugin callbacks for actions

#### Phase 3: Migrate Plugins (Long-term)

Migrate existing plugins to use the new API:
- Find References → `showResultsPanel`
- Diagnostics Panel → `showResultsPanel`
- Search Replace → `showResultsPanel` with `multiSelect`

---

### 4. Keybinding Strategy

All result panels should use the same keybindings, handled by the EDITOR:

| Key | Action | Handler |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Up` / `Down` | Navigate items | Editor (automatic) |
| `Enter` | Activate item | Editor calls `onSelect` |
| `Escape` | Close panel | Editor calls `onClose` |
| `Space` | Toggle selection (if multiSelect) | Editor (automatic) |

**No custom modes needed.** The editor's results panel implementation handles everything.

---

### 5. Visual Consistency

The editor-owned results panel ensures:
- Same selection highlighting style
- Same layout (title, items, help footer)
- Same scrolling behavior
- Same status bar integration

---

## Summary

| Pattern | When to Use | API |
|---------|-------------|-----|
| **Provider (QuickPick)** | Transient search with filtering | `startPrompt` + `setPromptSuggestions` |
| **Provider (Results Panel)** | Persistent panel with results list | `showResultsPanel` (new API) |
| **Controller** | Only when plugin needs full UI control | `createVirtualBufferInSplit` (escape hatch) |

The key insight is: **Let the editor own the UI.** Plugins should provide data and handle callbacks, not try to reimplement navigation and selection.

---

## Known Issues (Discovered During Implementation)

### `openFileInSplit` doesn't position cursor correctly when file is already open

**Severity:** Low (workaround exists)

**Description:** When calling `editor.openFileInSplit(split, path, line, column)` and the file is already open in that split, the cursor may not move to the specified position correctly.

**Workaround:** Use `editor.focusSplit(splitId)` followed by `editor.openFile(path, line, column)` instead. This pattern works correctly and is what `ResultsPanel.openInSource()` uses.

---

## Immediate Actions (Phase 1)

1. ~~Create ResultsPanel abstraction~~ ✓ (Done - `plugins/lib/results-panel.ts`)
2. ~~Migrate Find References to use ResultsPanel~~ ✓ (Done)
3. Fix Live Grep preview update issue
4. Fix Git Grep cursor positioning
5. Simplify Search Replace keybindings
6. Migrate Diagnostics Panel to use ResultsPanel
7. Document the Provider pattern as the recommended approach
